## Testing a Modern Inference Framework for POMP Models: A Case Study Using Stochastic Volatility

This repository contains the necessary code and manuscript sources for my honors thesis testing pypomp against the pomp R package using a Heston stochastic volatility case study. It includes IF2 optimization, particle-filter benchmarking in both R and Python, and a Quarto/LaTeX manuscript. 

### How to recreate documents

These tasks should be done in the following order:

Run 1d_global_search.R → produces initial_params_r.csv, 1d_global_search.rda

Run 1d_global_if2.py → produces 1d_global_if2_out.pkl

Run 1d_global_pf.py → produces pf_val_py.csv

Run 1d_global_pf.R → produces pf_val_r.csv

Render thesis (thesis.qmd) → produces the final PDF (and optional HTML)

Detailed, platform-specific instructions and notes are below.

### Prerequisites

#### Data
- SPX.csv: daily S&P 500 index data from 2010 to 2024

#### Python
- Python 3.10+ recommended
- Packages:
  - jax, jaxlib, pypomp (tutorials & install guidance: https://github.com/pypomp/tutorials.git)


### Scripts & Outputs
1) 1d_global_search.R: this script is used to run a parallel IF2 search from many random starts and evaluate them via particle filtering.
- Script Output:
    - initial_params_r.csv: the initial starts (natural scale) for both R and Python runs
    - 1d_global_search.rda contains:
        - t.box: run timing
        - if.box: all estimates of parameters (list of mif objects)
        - L.box: matrix of log likelihood (LL) and standard error for each time

2) 1d_global_if2.py: this script is used to run IF2 in pypomp using the same initial starts generated by R pomp.
- Script Output:
    - 1d_global_if2_out.pkl
#### Notes about 1d_global_if2_out.pkl structure:
- Dictionary with two entries
    - fit_out: A list containing output of the fitting step. Each entry is a replicate from the fitting step.
        - Various entries: A tuple of length 2 containing information for a replicate.
            - Entry 0: A JAX array containing the iterated filtering estimate of the LL for each iteration (plus an extra check when the extra is added).
            - Entry 1: A JAX array containing parameters from particles. First dimension varies iteration, second varies the particle, and the third varies the parameter.
    - pf_out: A list containing the output of the particle filtering step. 
        - Various entries: A list for a different replicate from the particle filtering step.
            - Entry 0: A numpy.float32 representing the estimated LL.
            - Entry 1: A numpy.float32 representing the estimated standard deviation of the LL estimate.

3) 1d_global_pf.py, 1d_global_pf.R: these scripts are used to run many particle filtering evaluations at a fixed MLE.
- Script Output:
  - pf_val_py.csv (column LL), pf_val_r.csv (column LL) respectively
